README.md, before:

# rtl-ppm-analyzer

`rtl-ppm-analyzer` is a Bash script designed to execute `rtl_test -p` with a timeout, save the output, and calculate the trimmed mean of 'cumulative PPM' from an RTL-SDR device. This script provides a straightforward way to manage SDR tests and analyze the performance and calibration of the SDR hardware.

## Dependencies

To run this script, you will need:

- `rtl-sdr`: This is a driver and toolset for RTL-SDR dongles which allows you to receive RF signals. You can install `rtl-sdr` from most package managers or compile it from source. Visit [RTL-SDR](https://osmocom.org/projects/rtl-sdr/wiki) for more information.

## Hardware Requirements

This script is specifically designed for use with RTL-SDR receivers that contain the RTL2832U chipset paired with the R820T2 tuner. An example of such a device is the RTL-SDR 820T2, which can be found at [Hacker Warehouse](https://hackerwarehouse.com/product/rtlsdr/). This combination is well-regarded for its sensitivity and stability, making it ideal for a wide range of radio frequency applications.

- **Recommended Model**: RTL-SDR 820T2
- **Chipset**: RTL2838 DVB-T

## Installation

Clone this repository using git:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/rtl-ppm-analyzer.git
```

Navigate into the project directory:

```bash
cd rtl-ppm-analyzer
```

Make sure the script is executable:

```bash
chmod +x rtl_ppm_analyzer.sh
```

## Usage

Run the script with the required timeout period (in seconds) as an argument:

```bash
./rtl_ppm_analyzer.sh 120
```

## References

This project was inspired by and utilizes concepts described in the following publications:

- Laufer, C. (2015). *The Hobbyist’s Guide to the RTL-SDR: Really Cheap Software Defined Radio*. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
- Donat, W. (2020). *Explore Software Defined Radio: Use SDR to Receive Satellite Images and Space Signals*. Pragmatic Programmers.
- Contributions and insights have also been incorporated from OpenAI's ChatGPT.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

Special thanks to the RTL-SDR community and developers of the RTL-SDR software for making accessible SDR technology available to hobbyists and researchers alike.

Commit message:

Add explanation on variability of results.

README.md, after:

# rtl-ppm-analyzer

`rtl-ppm-analyzer` is a Bash script designed to execute `rtl_test -p` with a timeout, save the output, and calculate the trimmed mean of 'cumulative PPM' from an RTL-SDR device. This script provides a straightforward way to manage SDR tests and analyze the performance and calibration of the SDR hardware.

## Dependencies

To run this script, you will need:

- `rtl-sdr`: This is a driver and toolset for RTL-SDR dongles which allows you to receive RF signals. You can install `rtl-sdr` from most package managers or compile it from source. Visit [RTL-SDR](https://osmocom.org/projects/rtl-sdr/wiki) for more information.

## Hardware Requirements

This script is specifically designed for use with RTL-SDR receivers that contain the RTL2832U chipset paired with the R820T2 tuner. An example of such a device is the RTL-SDR 820T2, which can be found at [Hacker Warehouse](https://hackerwarehouse.com/product/rtlsdr/). This combination is well-regarded for its sensitivity and stability, making it ideal for a wide range of radio frequency applications.

- **Recommended Model**: RTL-SDR 820T2
- **Chipset**: RTL2838 DVB-T

## Installation

Clone this repository using git:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/rtl-ppm-analyzer.git
```

Navigate into the project directory:

```bash
cd rtl-ppm-analyzer
```

Make sure the script is executable:

```bash
chmod +x rtl_ppm_analyzer.sh
```

## Usage

Run the script with the required timeout period (in seconds) as an argument:

```bash
./rtl_ppm_analyzer.sh 120
```

## Understanding Variability in Cumulative PPM

The value of 'cumulative PPM' (parts per million) can vary based on several factors, including the warm-up time of the SDR hardware, ambient temperature, and the physical stability of the device. Here's a deeper look into these factors:

- **Warm-Up Time**: Electronic components within SDRs, especially oscillators, can drift as they warm up. To obtain stable and reliable measurements, it is recommended to allow the SDR to warm up. This typically takes about 10-15 minutes, after which the measurements tend to stabilize.

- **Temperature Effects**: Changes in ambient temperature can affect the components in the SDR, leading to frequency drift. Operating the device in a controlled temperature environment can help minimize these effects.

- **Physical Stability**: Mechanical stress or vibrations can also influence the accuracy of measurements. Ensuring the SDR is placed on a stable surface and away from mechanical disturbances can improve performance.

Understanding these factors can help in setting up experiments and in interpreting the results more accurately.

## References

This project was inspired by and utilizes concepts described in the following publications:

- Laufer, C. (2015). *The Hobbyist’s Guide to the RTL-SDR: Really Cheap Software Defined Radio*. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
- Donat, W. (2020). *Explore Software Defined Radio: Use SDR to Receive Satellite Images and Space Signals*. Pragmatic Programmers.
- Contributions and insights have also been incorporated from OpenAI's ChatGPT.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

Special thanks to the RTL-SDR community and developers of the RTL-SDR software for making accessible SDR technology available to hobbyists and researchers alike.
